External data integration docs (#695)
mozilla/data-docs: src/concepts/external_data_integration.md

> # External data integration

Reviewer: I second that.

> # External data integration

Author: Agreed.
I think we have most of these alternate paths though because Fivetran wasn't an option back then. Specifically for stripe this would have potentially been easier: https://fivetran.com/docs/applications/stripe

[Fivetran](https://www.fivetran.com/) is used for importing data from external services into our data warehouse. A [range of prebuilt connectors](https://www.fivetran.com/connectors) are available that can be configured in the Fivetran web interface. Custom connectors can be implemented as Google Cloud Functions.

## Getting access

Access to Fivetran is limited to Mozilla employees. By default, users do not have permissions to create or access connectors. To gain access, please file a bug in [Jira under the DSRE project](https://mozilla-hub.atlassian.net/jira/software/c/projects/DSRE/issues/).

> Fivetran can be accessed using LDAP: `fivetran.com/dashboard`

Reviewer: I actually think this is fine. But I would perhaps include a comment that users should sign in using their Mozilla Google account.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/42538694/156152045-72f47b1a-58ce-4837-a621-5846602b7b55.png)

## Architecture

Fivetran is used to extract data from external services and load it into our data warehouse. For transforming data or writing data to a different destination [bigquery-etl](https://github.com/mozilla/bigquery-etl) is used.

The integration of Fivetran and external data import into our data platform is illustrated in the following:

![](../assets/fivetran_architecture.png)

> A separate connector is set up in Fivetran for each external service data should be imported from. The imports get triggered via Airflow which will have different DAGs with a specific schedule. Fivetran will dump the data into our data warehouse. Once the first airflow-triggered import is done, Airflow can trigger the ETL process which will write the transformed data to a different location in our data warehouse.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A separate connector is set up in Fivetran for each external service data should be imported from. The imports get triggered via Airflow which will have different DAGs with a specific schedule. Fivetran will dump the data into our data warehouse. Once the first airflow-triggered import is done, Airflow can trigger the ETL process which will write the extracted data to a different location in our data warehouse.
```

### Environments

> We have a production and development environment in Fivetran.

Reviewer: It also seems we have a third environment in Fivetran: `something.something.people`. Should we also have a description of what that is and if not us who is responsible for managing it?

| ----------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------ | ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Development | This environment allows developers to test their connectors during development, quickly deploy changes and make changes to imported data. | **Fivetran_Dev**   | `dev-fivetran`            | Anyone in data engineering                                                                         |
| Production  | This environment has connectors deployed that are used in production. Access to connectors and imported data is restricted.               | **Fivetran_Prod**  | `moz-fx-data-bq-fivetran` | Only automation has access. If access to the data is required a ticket needs to be filed with SRE. |

To prevent Fivetran from having access to our data warehouse, separate data destinations have been provisioned for Fivetran to dump imported data into. The data can be transformed and moved to different data destinations using bigquery-etl.

> When working in the **Fivetran_Dev** environment, data is written to `dev-fivetran`. All datasets are by default accessible to data engineers. So when working with sensitive data, it might be necessary to manually update the access permissions to the dataset. Ensure that the Fivetran service account has the necessary permissions to write data to the dataset when making updates.

Reviewer: Can we be explicit here that we mean GCP project `dev-fivetran` in BigQuery?
```suggestion
When working in the **Fivetran_Dev** environment, data is written to `dev-fivetran` GCP project in BigQuery. All datasets are by default accessible to data engineers. So when working with sensitive data, it might be necessary to manually update the access permissions to the dataset. Ensure that the Fivetran service account has the necessary permissions to write data to the dataset when making updates.
```

Once the development has finished, either manually delete previously created datasets or set an expiration date so that the datasets will be removed automatically after some time.

## Setting up connectors

This is a step-by-step guide for setting up a new connector in Fivetran, scheduling it via Airflow and transforming imported data via bigquery-etl:

> 1. Log in to [Fivetran](https://fivetran.com) and select the environment the new connector should be created in.

Reviewer: All steps are `1.`?

Reviewer: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/42538694/156152503-b6b79ee0-711c-4746-87ad-bb6350d2893c.png)

Reviewer: Please ignore, it gets rendered correctly.

1. Click on the "Add Connector" button and search for the service data that should be imported from. If no connector is available for the service please check out ["Developing custom connectors"](#developing-custom-connectors) for writing custom connectors.

> 1. Specify the name of the destination dataset Fivetran will dump data into.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Specify the name of the `destination schema` (BQ dataset name where data will be loaded)
```

> 1. Configure the connector by providing API credentials and other required settings.

Reviewer 2: Is it worth mentioning anything about Fivetran's default scheduling settings here? (which I think will be in effect until the last step in these instructions is completed)

1. Finish the setup and wait for the connection tests to pass.
1. Once the connector has been created a historical data import will be automatically triggered. This import can take a few minutes up to several days depending on how much historical data is available.
1. Specify the data transformation in [bigquery-etl](https://github.com/mozilla/bigquery-etl) or [private-bigquery-etl](https://github.com/mozilla/private-bigquery-etl) when working with sensitive data. Please follow the [general guide of creating a derived dataset](https://mozilla.github.io/bigquery-etl/cookbooks/creating_a_derived_dataset/). When writing the query, data will be queried from the dataset that was specified when the connector was set up. The connector documentation specifies what tables will be available and what the schemas will look like.
   - Make sure to query from the correct data destination depending on the environment for which the connector was set up for.

> 1. [Scheduling](https://github.com/mozilla/bigquery-etl/blob/main/docs/reference/scheduling.md) the ETL and the Fivetran import is also done in bigquery-etl. In the `metadata.yaml` file of the transformation queries. In addition to specifying the DAG, also specify the Fivetran tasks that the ETL depends on, for example:

Reviewer 2: I was going to suggest linking to https://mozilla.github.io/bigquery-etl/reference/scheduling/ instead, but it looks like the code blocks are busted in that view.  Is that a known issue?

Author: Not a known issue. We should fix that, I opened https://github.com/mozilla/bigquery-etl/issues/2768

   ```yaml
   scheduling:
     dag_name: bqetl_external_service
     depends_on_fivetran:
       - task_id: fivetran_import_1
       - task_id: another_fivetran_import
   ```

> 1. Once the changes have been merged into bigquery-etl and the Airflow DAGs have been updated and are available in Airflow the connector ID needs to be configured in the Airflow Admin interface. Looking at the Airflow DAGs each Fivetran import task will reference an Airflow variable. To configure these variables in the [Airflow Admin - Variables settings](https://workflow.telemetry.mozilla.org/variable/list/) add a new entry. The **Key** needs to be set to the variable name as shown in the DAG source, the **Value** is the Fivetran connector ID which can be copied from the Connection Details of the Fivetran connector in the "Setup" tab.

Reviewer 2: If this variable isn't added in a timely manner will things fail, and if so will they fail gracefully?

Author: Things will only fail when the DAG is actually turned on (by default it's off). But yeah, if this is not configured Airflow will error out, send a notification and owners will notice that something is wrong with the variable.

> 1. Once the changes have been merged into bigquery-etl and the Airflow DAGs have been updated and are available in Airflow the connector ID needs to be configured in the Airflow Admin interface. Looking at the Airflow DAGs each Fivetran import task will reference an Airflow variable. To configure these variables in the [Airflow Admin - Variables settings](https://workflow.telemetry.mozilla.org/variable/list/) add a new entry. The **Key** needs to be set to the variable name as shown in the DAG source, the **Value** is the Fivetran connector ID which can be copied from the Connection Details of the Fivetran connector in the "Setup" tab.

Reviewer: Would it be perhaps worth mentioning here why this step is needed, what does this get used for? It took me a moment to realise that most likely this is required to generate a URL for Airflow to contact in order to trigger a Fivetran run.

> 1. Enable the DAG in Airflow and trigger an import.

Reviewer 2: Might be worth mentioning that the first Airflow run will turn off the connector's default Fivetran scheduling.

Reviewer: I agree with this, it can be a bit confusing. I remember when I was working with a connector I was trying to find the option in the Fivetran UI and wasn't immediately apparent to me that this is some sort of "magic" that Fivetran does once you trigger a run manually.

## Developing custom connectors

> Fivetran might not provide a prebuilt connector for a specific service. It is possible to implement custom connectors that will be deployed as Google Cloud Functions. The code bases of these connectors are part of one of the following repositories:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Fivetran might not provide a prebuilt connector for a specific service. It is possible to implement custom connectors that will be deployed as [Google Cloud Functions](https://fivetran.com/docs/functions/google-cloud-functions). The code bases of these connectors are part of one of the following repositories:
```

- [Fivetran Connectors](https://github.com/mozilla/fivetran-connectors) - This repository contains custom connectors that can be shared publicly.
- [Private Fivetran Connectors](https://github.com/mozilla/private-fivetran-connectors) - This repository contains custom connectors that should not be shared publicly since the code bases might contain sensitive information.

When developing connectors use the **Fivetran_Dev** environment. This environment allows for faster changes, data is directly accessible and can be deleted by developers.
Deploy connectors to the **Fivetran_Prod** environment only after the connector has been thoroughly tested and the data schema is unlikely to change.
A detailed guide of how to create a new custom connector step by step, best practices and tips around debugging are available [here](https://github.com/mozilla/fivetran-connectors#development).

## Getting help

> - **#data-help** - for questions about the data imported from external services and derived datasets
> - **#fivetran-discussion** - for questions regarding the development of custom connectors or setting up connectors

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [**#data-help**](https://mozilla.slack.com/archives/C4D5ZA91B) - for questions about the data imported from external services and derived datasets
- [**#fivetran-discussion**](https://mozilla.slack.com/archives/C02GZTFM08M) - for questions regarding the development of custom connectors or setting up connectors
```
